(flowing water)
(dramatic music)
Many of the world's greatest stories
begin with a journey.
A quest to answer life's most intimate questions.
"Where do we come from?"
"Why are we here?"
From the dawn of time, all cultures have created stories
to help explain the ultimate nature of things,
and perhaps a new story is emerging in our time.
One grounded in contemporary science and yet
nourished by the ancient religious wisdom of our planet.
What if the universe, even the Earth itself,
has its own unique story to tell?
One in which we play a profound role.
(triumphant music)
(boat horn)
We're on the Greek island of Samos.
Just a mile off the coast of Turkey.
We could tell the story of the universe anywhere.
Each place would offers its own unique possibilities
for the telling but we chose Samos because it's one of the
great crossroads of human history.
Europeans, Asians and Africans have all made their way here.
And by telling the story on an island,
surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea,
we will be reminded that we live on this shining planet
sailing through the great ocean of the universe.
And there's another reason we have come to Samos
and that is because 2,600-years ago
Pythagoras was born here.
Pythagoras, a mathematician and philosopher,
was one of the first humans to realize
that the harmonies and relationships in the universe
could be given expression using numbers.
The current of thought he generated led eventually
to all of modern mathematical science.
He was also a great teacher.
In fact legend has it that he invented the word philosophy,
a word of wisdom.
We'll spend a day here on Samos.
Before the clock strikes midnight,
we will have recounted the great events
of our 14-billion-year cosmic evolution.
Our immense journey told in a single day
on one of Earth's magical islands.
How did it all start?
An awesome question, certainly,
but it appears there really was a beginning.
Some scientists refer to this as the Big Bang,
I like to call it the Great Flaring Forth.
Imagine the universe beginning like this.
(ominous tones)
(roaring flame)
14-billion-years ago, everything in the universe,
all the bright matter of the stars and galaxies
as well as all the dark matter no one has ever seen,
all of it existed in a single point so energetic it was
trillions of degrees hot.
Instantly this micro-universe rushed apart,
even faster than the speed of light.
The discovery that the universe has expanded
and is still expanding is one of the greatest
of human history.
The common understanding had been that the universe
is simply a vast space,
a vast space in which things existed.
Large things like galaxies and small things like atoms.
Scientists knew that matter changed form in the universe
but everyone assumed that the universe as a whole
was not changing.
But no.
The universe is changing, and has changed dramatically.
The universe has a story.
A beginning,
a middle where we are now,
and perhaps in some far-distant future, an end.
In the 1920's, the cosmologist Edwin Hubble
trained his 100-inch telescope at the night sky.
He was trying to determine if our Milky Way was the
only galaxy in the universe.
Not only did he discover the universe is filled
with galaxies, he also determined that all of them
are rushing away from each other.
With Hubble's work, humanity learned that the universe
began with a massive explosion that has been
carrying the galaxies apart for billions of years.
(exotic music)
Another special quality about the universe
is the rate of expansion.
If the rate of expansion had been slower,
even slightly slower,
even a millionth of a percent slower,
the universe would have recollapsed immediately.
That would have been it.
After a million-years, the universe would have imploded
upon itself and formed a massive black hole.
On the other hand, if the universe has expanded
a little more quickly,
even slightly more quickly,
even, calculations show,
one-millionth of 1% more quickly,
the universe would have expanded too quickly
for structures to form.
It would have simply exploded.
There would have been no galaxies, no structure,
no life, nothing but dust for all time.
So what we've discovered is that we're living in a universe
that is expanding at exactly the rate necessary
for life and structure to come forth.
It could be then that even though we can't call
the early universe "alive,"
we can understand it as life-generating.
One of the physicists who is reflecting on this
is the celebrated Freeman Dyson
and he mused that the more
he reflected on the structures of the early universe,
the more he became convinced that in some sense
the universe must have known from the very beginning
that life was coming.
The light from the beginning of time
has been travelling for 14-billion-years.
Meanwhile, life has been evolving.
With the recent emergence of advanced technology,
we are at last able to see the story these photons tell
about the birth of the universe
and where we ultimately come from.
Morning on a Greek island is like the first day of creation
and wandering around here you feel like
the first person.
Inevitably, humans would ask,
"What gave birth to all of this beauty?"
"What was the form of creativity
"that brought this forth?"
Consider galaxies.
What brought the galaxies forth?
You know, even a century ago, this is hard to imagine,
we didn't know if there were two galaxies
in the entire universe.
That was a main focus of attention among scientists.
Now we know there are 100-billion,
maybe even a trillion galaxies.
What is the creativity that brought forth
a trillion galaxies?
Let's consider our own Milky Way galaxy.
It's a galaxy with huge spiral arms.
Now when we first began to discover galaxies,
we thought maybe these spiral arms
were composed of physical matter.
But actually it's much more interesting.
The arms are actually waves that are passing through
the galaxy.
They're called density waves and as they pass through
clouds of hydrogen and helium, they ignite star birth.
That's the way to picture the Milky Way galaxy.
Not so much as a thing,
but rather as an activity.
It's an ongoing activity of bringing forth stars.
We live in the midst of this intense creativity.
(flowing water)
Come into this little church, I want to show you something.
(serene music)
The ceiling, as you can see, is filled with stars.
The same is true of most of the churches
on the island of Samos.
The ancient Greeks, like Pythagoras,
thought the stars were alive.
Even divine.
Throughout history, every culture has been stunned
by the presence of stars in the vastness of the night sky.
So deeply moved by the majesty emanating
from the brilliance of the stars,
we have built our lives around them.
We've even organized entire civilizations
upon their beauty and order.
Here's the essence of the universe story.
The stars are our ancestors.
Out of them everything comes forth.
Stars are dynamic entities.
They're born, they develop, they even die.
Star birth occurs when gravity squeezes together
a cloud of atoms so tightly that nuclear fusion
ignites in the center.
In the process, hydrogen fuses into helium.
This nuclear energy expands outwards
and opposes gravity.
So stars represent an amazingly creative balance
between the powers of gravitational collapse
and nuclear explosion.
And once a star's nuclear fuel is spent, there's nothing
left to prevent gravity from collapsing inwards
causing the death-spiral to begin.
This super-concentrated dot of matter
which we call a supernova,
explodes outward with the power of 100-billion stars.
And as it expands, it creates all of the elements.
Phosphorus, oxygen, carbon, gold.
These are spewed out into the Milky Way galaxy
and then the whole process starts again.
They drift as a cloud and then they collapse,
give birth to a star, the Earth.
It's by this stupendous process that we can say,
"The stars are our ancestors."
(exotic music)
It's just such an amazing discovery.
The carbon atoms of this beet and of the lettuce
and of our brains, our skin,
all of it passed through an intense explosion of a star.
In pondering the source of the sun's power,
we can now reflect on something
no earlier humans could know.
The sun is converting four-million-tons of its mass
into energy every second.
All of life feeds on the roaring energy of the sun.
Our solar system then is the self-energizing womb
of creativity.
And all of this had its start in a cloud of dust.
(exotic music)
(man singing in foreign language)
It was really difficult for humans to realize that
we live on a planet circling a star.
I mean we were here for hundreds of thousands of years
before Aristarchus 2,000-years ago, right here on Samos,
realized we are spinning around the sun.
That was such an amazing insight
that it vanished, actually.
And it wasn't until Copernicus discovered it again
in the 16th Century
that humans really began to absorb the fact
that we are on this planet.
Let me use these vegetables to explain our solar system.
So here we have the sun, this cabbage as the Sun.
Now, actually,
if this was to be in scale,
this cabbage would have to be a million times
the size of this pepper.
Budgetary considerations made that impossible,
so you just have to use your imagination.
And what we've learned in the 20th Century
is about the composition of the planets.
First we have the large planets.
So we have Jupiter here, and we have Saturn
and Uranus and Neptune.
These are large enough to hold on
to all the lighter elements so that
they actually are gaseous.
Too small to be a star but yet too large to be solid.
The other kind then we have indicated here with these rocks.
So we have Mercury then we have Venus,
we jump over to Mars.
These are the rocky planets most of which are solid.
But there's one special rocky planet.
One that's not too small, and not too big.
One that's not too hot and not too cold.
One that's not exactly solid but not exactly liquid.
We call it home.
Earth is very much like an egg.
The core of the Earth is like the yolk.
The mantle of the Earth is like the egg white,
and the crust of the Earth is like the egg shell.
What happens is that,
early on when the Earth is in a molten state,
all of the really heavy elements like iron and nickel
sink into the core and then the elements like magnesium
form this outer layer around the core, the mantle.
The crust is only 10 to 50-miles-thick
and that's the only solid part of Earth.
All the rest is in motion.
Plumes of molten rock will rise up from the mantle
and harden into plates that form the crust.
As these plates slide around the surface of Earth,
they collide and crumple into majestic mountain ranges
or they are forced back down
where they melt and sink toward the center of Earth.
This discovery, which originated with Alfred Wegener,
is called plate tectonics
and is one of the greatest of history.
Earth became encircled by great tidal oceans
and held by a thin layer of atmosphere.
A churning, volcanic Earth can now bring forth
the next wonder of existence.
The living cell.
How are we gonna tell the story of life?
How did it all begin?
What theory shall we offer to explain this?
The simple truth is that no one knows with full certainty.
But even though the detailed explanation still eludes us,
scientists have began to approach the whole question of life
from a radical new perspective.
That of self-organization.
You see, during the modern period we thought of the world
as machine-like and then life was an accident.
But now with the work of a number of chemists,
notably Ilya Prigogine who won a Nobel Prize for this work,
we are beginning to discover
the act of patterning in matter itself.
It's intrinsic to matter.
From this new perspective life is not an accident.
Life is inevitable.
A planet reaches a certain complexity of its matter,
and then life blossoms forth, quite naturally.
Consider whirlpools.
This spiral, swirling action can appear anywhere
so long as there is a body of liquid-moving-water.
It is not the water itself that endures as a spiral,
because the water molecules are constantly flowing
in and out of the whirlpool.
It is rather the emergent dynamic structure that endures.
(crashing waves)
Such is the nature of life.
The universe began as a great outpouring of cosmic breath.
Cosmic energy that then swirled and twisted and complexified
until it could burst forth into flowers and animals
and fish and all of these elegant explosions of energy.
But it's not just energy, and it's not just living energy.
This is energy that is aware.
By awareness or sentience, we mean something that is
more than what takes place in the realm
of elementary particles and yet,
less than full human consciousness.
So where does such awareness arise?
Some biologists are beginning to speculate that
awareness has its foundation in the very
self-organizing dynamics of the universe.
For cell biologist Ursula Goodenough,
this awareness is a kind of primitive discernment
and it reveals itself especially in the membrane
of each cell, that thin skin-like layer
that covers every cell.
(crashing waves)
If we had microscopes for eyes,
we could see it all happening right here
in these tide pools.
There millions of cells are swarming about
and they're encountering molecules over and over again
and with every encounter,
discernment emerges.
Why?
Because a decision has to be made.
An intelligent decision.
Now up in the cliff over here there's an ancient castle
that will help me explain.
This church which is called Metamorphosis
is nearly 1,000-years-old.
Above it is a castle that once guarded entrance
into the magical pitomi valley.
The castle was built to do what membranes do.
Let your friends in, keep your enemies out.
The ongoing creativity of the universe
is seen in the complex development of life itself.
After it had circled the sun for hundreds
of millions of years, Earth's most primitive organisms
developed molecules that would resonate with the sun.
How are we to picture this process involving Earth and sun
bringing forth photosynthesis?
As an engineering project?
I guess.
But try a new metaphor.
Imagine two lovers longing for each other.
What is it they truly desire?
The relationship is charged with energy and promise.
There's the sun exploding with brilliance.
There's the Earth, basking in the sun's rays.
But Earth is not passive.
Earth's systems attune to the sun.
Changing their molecule structures
in order to draw in light and convert it to food.
As the complexity of life deepens,
entwinement itself also deepens.
How are we going to tell the story of the living Earth?
In particular, how are we going to tell the story of Earth
to our children?
This is especially important because
in the last couple centuries,
we have learned more about the Earth
than in perhaps the previous 100,000-years.
So the question is, how are we going to convey that,
the essence of that, to the next generation?
One thing is completely clear.
The Earth is very different than what we thought.
The Earth is not a platform.
It's not a background.
In fact, the great discovery is this.
Life doesn't exist on top of the Earth,
life is a partner.
To the oceans, to the atmosphere, to the land.
For instance, if we look at the atmosphere,
it is 21% oxygen.
This makes us unique among all the known planets.
The only reason we have oxygen in our atmosphere
is that life is pouring it forth each day.
So the very composition of our air reflects the fact
that life is here.
In that sense, life is woven into the atmosphere.
But an even more radical hypothesis
is beginning to emerge in the minds of some scientists.
Perhaps Earth is not only an integrated system.
Perhaps Earth somehow maintains itself
so that life can flourish.
Consider temperature.
Life only exists in a very narrow band of temperature.
So something like this temperature has been true of Earth
for four-billion-years.
Now scientists originally thought this was because the Earth
just happened to be 93-million-miles away from the sun,
but during the 1950's we learned about the fusion processes
taking place in stars and so now we know
the sun's temperature has increased by over 25%
over the last four-billion-years.
Which means, somehow,
Earth has had to adapt itself to maintain
that stable, narrow band of temperature.
How?
We know some of the details.
Early Earth had 1,000-times the carbon dioxide
as present-day Earth.
So during that time, the Earth's system has drawn
the carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere
forming for instance the shells of marine algae
and then when the marine algae die
the shells go to the bottom of the ocean.
So more and more carbon dioxide is taken
out of the atmosphere which enables the Earth
to cool down while the sun heats up.
But the question returns.
Is all of this being organized by the Earth as a whole
so that life could flourish?
If that's the case, then the atmosphere is not just stuff.
It's something like a membrane.
And we are not living on an Earth,
we are actually participants in a vast, intricate system
that is something like a living cell.
A living cell has the power to learn through time.
This is what distinguishes the first cells
from all the other beings that existed
prior to life's emergence.
A star for instance has the power to organize itself
for billions of years.
But throughout that time it never needs to learn
anything new.
Life learns.
For life can adapt itself to new situations
by changing its form and by remembering these changes.
Life remembers the past by storing information
in its DNA molecules.
It is this power of memory encased in each living cell
that enables life to learn and thus evolve.
One of the ways in which to understand the nature
of life's memory is by using the ideas
of the mathematician and philosopher Pythagoras.
You know, a number of Pythagoras' ideas were revolutionary
and like a lot of revolutionary ideas,
they weren't that popular.
In fact, Pythagoras had to hide from the tyrant Polycrates
who was in charge of Samos.
And tradition has it, this is where he hid, right here.
Half-way up the mountain in a cave there.
One of Pythagoras' central convictions
was that the essence of life is not air
or water or fire as the other Greek philosophers taught,
rather, the essence of life is number.
Pattern.
It seems such an odd idea, I mean,
life is so sensuous, it's so complex, so rich.
How can the essence of that be something abstract
like number or pattern?
It is precisely this deep connection between
life and pattern that enables life to remember
its crucial achievements.
That's what DNA does.
In the precise sequence of the nuclear tides,
DNA holds the essence of life.
Life did not hand down the actual molecules to my body.
Instead, life handed their essence
in the form of genetic information.
Because of this, our bodies can come alive
a thousand different ways each day.
Life has learned to learn.
One of the central ways of learning for our species
involves seeing.
Life has invented so many different ways of seeing.
The amazing thing is, this process is not yet over.
Come with me into Pythagoras' cave.
(ominous atmospheric music)
Beginning billions of years ago,
the earliest cells began to develop a sensitivity to light.
They can sense it and move toward it.
And it was this capacity that led eventually
to the development of the eye.
And the first eye of which we have any fossil evidence
is that of the Trilobite, 500-million-years ago.
The Trilobite, intent upon piercing through the darkness,
invented an eye using calcite, a mineral.
The Trilobite was able to see only in the direction
of these rods.
A primal form of seeing that proved so successful
we find it even now in the compound eyes
of flies and lobsters.
An entirely different form of seeing was invented
by the worms and carried forward by the fish.
This type of eye is the one we know best
for it's the one we inherited.
The water-based eye.
Even after 500-million-years,
eyesight continues to evolve.
In humans, the power of seeing deepens
with a new kind of sight.
Insight.
We see an inner screen of our imaginations.
Life has learned yet another way of seeing.
One with the power to transform everything.
(majestic music)
With this new way of seeing, we find ourselves
blinking in a thrilling and yet unsettling light.
Rooted in the center of immensities,
we open our eyes and see each thing anew,
each thing ablaze with the cosmic creativity
billions of years old.
With the insights made possible
with conscious self-awareness,
our vision now extends back through billions of years
of evolution.
We see not only the scurrying spider
but the entire cosmic journey
layered into the spider's body.
Including even the distant stars
out of whose explosions
its molecules were constructed.
And this capacity to see into the depths of time
gives new meaning to death.
(ominous music)
The universe, throughout space and time,
is filled with violence and chaos.
Millions of galaxies have been destroyed.
Trillions of animals have been killed.
Death and suffering are woven into the very heart
of the universe.
Usually such destruction is massive and senseless.
A volcano erupts and kills every living being
in its vicinity.
But it can also happen that dealing with death
leads to more complex, co-evolutionary relationships.
For a rabbit, an eagle wears the face of destruction.
But in this relationship, the eagle develops
more acute eyesight and the rabbit develops
greater speed for escape.
Interdependent communities arise out of suffering and death.
The ultimate meaning of this escapes easy explanation.
We are confronted with a fundamental mystery
in which the small self of the individual
dies into and nourishes the whole community.
But living beings are not just linked together by food.
Passion.
Our urge to merge.
What could be more intimate to our souls?
Our passions determine so much of our lives.
They are the wild, explosive energies
of all of love and creativity.
And such desire resides at the very center of life.
With fish, the female deposits her eggs
and the male later fertilizes them.
There's no contact between them.
100-million-years later, when the lizards have evolved
out of their fish and amphibian ancestors,
the passion to merge has deepened considerably.
With mammals and birds,
passions reach yet a new crescendo.
Not only are they able to co-mingle as one body,
they can become so profoundly bonded
they remain in the relationship their entire lives.
We are not just similar to animals,
we have been shaped by them.
Our passions come from vertebrate evolution.
Even our compassion can be understood
as an expansion of what took place
hundred of millions of years ago
in the ocean with the early fish.
Biologists speculate that mutations led to a mother fish
who scared away predators from her babies.
This behavior was new at that time.
What was more common among fish back then
was a mother who ate her young.
With the emergence of the fish's descendants,
mammals and birds, maternal care broadened.
Now the offspring were not just protected from predators,
but were nourished directly by their mother.
This care even included transmission of survival information
of their group.
And in some cases, this required years of training.
We see then the caring behavior among vertebrates
expanding for 500-million-years
before the emergence of homo-sapiens.
Earlier humans intuited this deepening compassion
and celebrated it with images
of the divine feminine.
As we enter into evening here on Samos,
we approach one of the deep mysteries
at the center of every traditional cosmic story.
The nature and ultimate meaning of the human.
We humans have our origin in the birth of the universe
14-billion-years ago.
And thus we are composed of the same energy and quanta
as that which composes everything in the universe.
And we follow from the first cell
emerging four-billion-years ago.
So we're genetic cousins to every living being.
So what is distinct about us?
What is uniquely human?
Our current best evidence suggests that
something took place between
six and seven-million-years ago in Africa.
Something happened to ignite the human lineage
in the primate world.
A new line of energetic apes emerged that would,
over several million years, bring forth massive brains
and learn to dwell on a world saturated with dreams.
Nothing like them had every existed before.
So, what gave rise to us?
We don't really know.
We don't have the detailed knowledge
of that transformation yet.
We're forced to speculate on the data.
And perhaps that's entirely appropriate here in the night
to be forced to dream about the
origins of this dream-making animal.
One theory offered by the scientist
is particularly fascinating.
It suggests that humanity has its origin
in the prolongation of childhood.
(gentle upbeat music)
(children's chatter)
The idea is that mutations took place
which slowed down our development.
Humans went through the same phases as say,
the chimpanzees, but they remained in each stage
for a longer period of time.
In particular, this meant that the humans were child-like
for more of their lives than other mammals.
So, to understand what makes a human human,
we can study the children of any mammalian species.
They jump to play.
They explore the world with their eyes.
And they taste the world with their mouths.
Simple existence thrills them.
Their actions are, in some sense, free.
So, after nearly four-billion-years an animal emerged
that could remain free, spontaneous,
curious, flexible, open,
impelled to try everything.
So what was going to happen now?
Early humans awoke to an incandescent consciousness.
But where other animals were controlled by instincts,
humans were liberated from such set reactions.
Captivated by the thrill of movement,
we could make dance,
or sports central to our lives.
Astonished by the sounds of Earth,
we could dedicate ourselves to the joy of making music.
Or making love.
The greatest creation in human history
was what enabled humans to plunge into
and to share their super-abundant consciousness.
This new invention was language.
More simply, the symbol.
The symbols of language
and art and mathematics,
opened up new depths of consciousness.
Each human began to carry an entire universe within.
This new form of consciousness,
called symbolic consciousness,
would soon change everything.
(bell tolls)
A crucial step in the process of becoming human
was learning to externalize consciousness.
To represent in the physical world
what we had experienced within.
This is the Archaeological Museum on the island of Samos.
Come and have a look.
By creating marks on bone or in wet clay,
humans invented a way to fix their knowledge
into an enduring form outside of themselves.
The coding processes of life were bursting beyond
the DNA molecule.
So with human culture, experience itself
can be remembered and passed down
for thousands of years.
Not just successful mutations,
any valuable understanding,
even if experienced by a single human being
can become part of the enduring legacy.
Works of the mind and spirit flowed into Samos
from every direction of the ancient world.
From Athens and Mesopotamia
as well as Spain, Egypt, Persia.
You know, in the early universe, concentrations of matter
led to the emergence of galaxies
and something similar was going on here.
In Samos and in other cities we find a concentration
of symbolic constructions.
What does this mean really?
It means that rare insights
and deep feelings from around the planet
and from different eras of time
are all folded together here.
Out of this powerful, alchemical mixing,
human consciousness complexified into new forms.
Just think of it.
For billions of years, rocks were just rocks.
And then, in a geological instant,
all over the planet they began to appear with these
scratchings on them.
Even more amazing, these little marks were organizing
entire civilizations.
With the appearance of the human,
the coding process of life burst beyond the DNA molecule
and began carving its information into stone.
Symbols not only enabled humans to
accumulate knowledge through millennia,
they also offered a final and explosive possibility
for human emergence.
Symbols enabled humans to concentrate their consciousness
upon consciousness.
This was a development with magnificent
and yet unexpected consequences.
Like a magnifying glass focusing the sunlight upon a leaf,
symbols set fire to human possibility
that had slumbered for 100,000-years.
Look at this colossal form.
It's almost 15-feet-high.
Now imagine dozens of such statues.
As the Greeks moved and lived among them,
their self-conceptions would be changed.
They would begin to imagine they were god-like.
Capable of anything.
Such systems we call in science,
self-amplifying loops.
Consciousness giving birth to symbols
which then magnify consciousness.
In this way, humans are not simply evolving,
they were consciously participating
in giving birth to themselves.
And what was coming forth
was a planet-altering species.
For this activity was taking place not simply here
on the ancient island of Samos,
but actually throughout the planet in every civilization.
Super-charged with confidence coming from the reverberations
of such symbols, human presence burst forth
and altered the very face of the planet.
Pyramids rose up from the African desert.
Ancient rivers were diverted.
Land as large as the eye could see was watered
by irrigation systems.
Even the forest scattered across the oceans
in the form of sailing vessels.
For the first time in Earth's history,
seeds were not subject to the vagaries of climate
but received their watery nourishment
with the precision and inevitability of logical thought.
Soon even the inner-order of the seeds
was captured by the science of genetics.
What does it mean when even the seeds
begin to live not just in the Earth
but in an Earth shaped by human consciousness?
With their equations and their measurements,
the early scientist discovered truths
none of the classical scholars had known.
In astronomy, chemistry, physiology,
humans began to understand the world
with their numbers and patterns.
(ominous music)
The defining characteristic of this new
modern form of consciousness
was the decision to employ our science and technology
to control nature for our own use.
The wide-spread conviction of the industrial world
was that nature was inferior to us.
Such a world view in which only humans
have sentient feelings allowed all of nature
to become nothing more than a resource
we could exploit in any way we wished.
Even Rene Descartes,
the most significant philosopher of the modern age,
believed that when animals made crying sounds
they were not suffering,
they were simply malfunctioning machines.
Humans were gaining control of Earth's processes
and to what purpose?
To create a better world.
To eliminate hunger, to provide for our children.
To have fun!
And to fulfill this dream we poured forth
all of our energies, all of our technologies,
and with stupendous results.
In the blink of an eye we exploded to seven-billion humans.
The irony of it all,
housing and feeding this many humans
has already gutted our oceans and forests.
We've ended up achieving something like the opposite
of what we dreamt of.
It's not just that we're using up all the energies of Earth,
it's much deeper than that.
We're changing life's dynamics
and in an irreversible way.
(roaring flames)
(somber music)
We're just beginning to realize
that over the last few decades we have
profoundly altered the evolutionary dynamics of Earth.
The air.
The climate.
The rivers.
The oceans.
Even the DNA.
We live on a different planet now.
A planet where not biology but symbolic consciousness
is the determining factor for evolution.
This great reversal has taken place.
In the far-distant past, life drew forth
symbolic consciousness.
But now symbolic consciousness
has seized control of life.
With our languages and our machines
we have become as powerful as the planet itself.
Because of us, ice caps are melting.
Because of us, coral reefs the size of mountains
are bleaching white.
But nothing shows this disaster more clearly
than life itself.
Because of us, thousands of species are going extinct
each year.
Nothing this devastating has taken place on Earth
since the extinction of the dinosaurs
65-million-years ago.
We are faced with a collective challenge
no previous generation even contemplated.
(melancholic orchestral music)
How are we to use this symbolic consciousness
to create a human presence that will enhance
the well-being of the Earth community?
We are beginning to understand the profound powers
of the universe.
And just as these powers have brought forth
galaxies, stars, and life itself,
perhaps the universe is now unfolding towards some
new destiny.
What if our ultimate destiny is to experience the universe
so deeply we come to realize that we are
in some sense the mind and heart of the universe?
Our deepest yearning is for a whole-hearted participation
in this flourishing.
As we float in the midst of such mysterious immensities,
is there any deep wisdom
that might help us align our consciousness
with the grain of cosmic evolution?
Wonder will guide us.
The human species has a genius for becoming astounded
by almost anything in the universe.
What can this mean?
The body of the universe gave birth to our bodies.
The self-organizing dynamics of the universe
gave birth to your minds.
We belong here.
We've always belonged here.
These deep discoveries of science are leading
to a new story of the universe.
It's a story that can be summarized in a single sentence.
Over the course of over 14-billion-years,
hydrogen gas transformed itself into
mountains,
butterflies,
the music of Bach,
and you and me.
And these energies coursing through us
may indeed renew the face of the Earth.
(wondrous orchestral music)